## Understanding Monitoring
To set the tone for this course, we’ll actually want to start by understanding the importance of the key concepts observability, metrics, and monitoring.

**Observability** itself describes how well someone can measure the system's health using collected data. 

There are three types of data that are each crucial for maintaining observability, commonly referred to as the three pillars of observability: logs, metrics, and tracing.

Throughout this course, we'll be primarily dealing with **metrics**, which are defined as a quantifiable measurement collected and used to assess system performance, health, and security as part of a complete monitoring solution.

**Monitoring** complements observability but isn't the same. While observability describes actively observing the system's health, monitoring is the act of collecting this data in one place to display it for the user to further analyze the system state or otherwise take action. 

Insights from monitoring systems can lead to a host of benefits besides supporting observability. As an example, analyzing how resources are being used can aid in cost and resource optimization. When running a query against a database, if that query hangs because it became locked in transaction, it can cause excessive resource usage which can lead to halted operations, unnecessary high costs, and slow performance. 

As a more dramatic example, paying attention to system readings can lead to the discovery of [significant security vulnerabilities](https://cybernews.com/editorial/xz-linux-backdoor-explained). In the case linked here, a software developer discovered an update to an open source package called XZ utils contained an installed backdoor after investigating sluggish performance on his Debian system. Monitoring alerts, thresholds, and historical analysis can all aid in identifying unexpected or untypical system behavior that can reveal major security breaches.

Monitoring, then, can bring about increased operational efficiency and greater system security as just two of its benefits when leveraged correctly in system maintenance and management. Imagine the possibilities of how else monitoring can bring value to your infrastructure and operations. This will help you to craft an effective security and governance policy that can be applied to guide management of Prometheus and any other observability stack software.
