Visualizing metrics
So you have a working Prometheus and Kubernetes installation at this point, and are able to view basic statistics about your Prometheus cluster or possibly running applications at this point. How can you put the metrics being collected to good use? It’s time to graph these collected values.

Note: If you’re having problems with performance attempting to visualize a large number of dashboards at a time, regardless of what visualization software is in place, you may benefit from reviewing this set of best practices and recommendations from Prometheus on optimizing metrics visualization within your infrastructure. This becomes especially important when considering monitoring Kubernetes infrastructure in all of its complexity.

At a high level, it’s recommended to take your time thinking about the possible failure modes and how to render just these essential statistics in a concise and well thought out set of dashboards.

What are the options?

The Prometheus web console
You’re able to leverage the built-in Prometheus web console to visualize metrics without the need for third-party solutions. The Go language is used as the language of choice for building out this console template graph library. Some default options and examples are available within the official Prometheus repository as reference that are explained further within the documentation.

The default graphing capabilities are available at localhost:9090/graph by default under the “Graph” tab. Enter in a metrics variable or a PromQL expression (view official examples here) to view the generated graph that is retrieved as a result.

Grafana
The most popular option and industry standard for a number of years in observability & metrics visualization is Grafana. At the time of this course being created, it was most recently awarded the most used observability technology in Grafana Lab’s 2024 survey (Prometheus came in #2!).

Photo Source: https://play.grafana.org (where you can interact with this example dashboard hosted by Grafana Labs for free, and learn more about Grafana)

Grafana is an open source observability platform that allows you to collect, correlate, and visualize data in a self-managed fashion or hosted in the cloud. While Grafana Labs powers a number of monitoring and observability solutions, you'll be most interested in Grafana itself, forever free-to-use (here it is on GitHub) for the purposes of metrics visualization. This powerful software allows you to create or use custom dashboards to query, graph, alert on, and get detailed looks into the state of your data while connecting to any number of data sources. One of these options for data sources, of course, is Prometheus, which they offer full integration and support for. 

Note: Grafana does offer an easy-to-use Kubernetes monitoring stack on Grafana Cloud with an “actually useful Free Plan” (minus the 8x5 M-F support).

Perses
Perses is (at the time of writing this) a candidate for inclusion within the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) and currently belongs to the CoreDash community and the Linux Foundation. The primary goal for the project is to become a standard dashboard visualization tool for Prometheus and other data sources like Thanos. 

While Perses is a much younger project (especially in comparison to tools like Grafana), it poses significant promise for enterprises and projects struggling with managing thousands of dashboards at a time. 

Using Grafana presents a number of challenges for projects in these kinds of positions when handling upgrades or schema changes. As a result, Perses was conceptualized and was created specifically for use with Prometheus, enabling dashboard-as-code in a GitOps-friendly manner (not something that's possible out-of-the-box with Grafana).

OpenSearch
Another wide range of functionality is available within Amazon Web Services' OpenSearch, an open-source fork of Elasticsearch and Kibana that allows you to perform a wide range of actions on your data including real-time application monitoring, log analytics, and website search. To learn more about ingesting and visualizing metrics from Prometheus on OpenSearch, see the official documentation. 


