Alerting rules can easily be subject to a number of different concerns: 

1. Metrics names could be missing or incorrectly entered
2. A rule could be renamed that is in the middle of a rule chain
3. Rules could be maintained by different teams
4. A rule could be set too sensitively so your server ends up flooded with a huge number of requests

Problems can easily be overlooked if no actions are being taken to monitor for errors within Prometheus alerting rules. As a result, being able to quickly validate changes to Prometheus’ alert configuration files is essential when attempting to handle alert management in production. 

Potentially hundreds of alerts can be configured at a time, making it difficult to fully validate changes to alert rules. Additionally, Prometheus will reject all defined alert rules if some rules are invalid; this can, of course, be disastrous if not quickly caught and corrected. Because of this, it is best practice to confirm the success of alerting rules prior to implementing them within your infrastructure. 

What are some ways to achieve this?

## Rule linting within Prometheus
### Prometheus Console

The simplest form of testing Prometheus alert rules is to write out the query to be attempted, including any defined thresholds, into the Prometheus console to confirm the retrieved results are as expected. It should be noted that an alerting rule query is in a non-firing state if it returns an empty response with no time-series data. Else, if results are returned, the alerts that are returned per each time series are actively firing.

## promtool
Included by default in Prometheus, promtool is a handy open-source tool that helps you lint rules and validate your alert configuration. It does this through executing YAML files that contain unit tests for rules. Let’s walk through an example of what this looks like.

Say we want to test out an alert called kubernetes-alert.yaml. This alert checks every 5 minutes to make sure Kubernetes is running; if it isn’t, the alert fires with a warning severity label and a tag for the associated engineering team.

```bash
groups:
- name: Kubernetes
  rules:
  - alert: KubernetesDown
    annotations:
      summary: 'Kubernetes is missing from service discovery'
      description: 'Kubernetes in {{ $labels.cluster }} is down'
    expr: up{job="kubernetes",cluster="prod"} == 0
    for: 5m
    labels:
      severity: warning
      team: engineering
```
The unit test for this alert will look like the following:

```bash
rule_files:
  - kubernetes-alert.yaml

evaluation_interval: 1m

tests:
  - interval: 1m
    input_series:
      - series: 'up{job="kubernetes",cluster="prod"}'
        values: '0x5 1 1'
    alert_rule_test:
    - alertname: KubernetesDown
      eval_time: 4m
      exp_alerts: []
    - alertname: KubernetesDown
      eval_time: 5m
      exp_alerts:
      - exp_labels:
          severity: warning
          team: engineering
          job: kubernetes
          cluster: prod
        exp_annotations:
          description: Kubernetes in {{ $labels.cluster }} is down'
          summary: Kubernetes is missing from service discovery'
```

Samples should be evaluated on a 1 minute interval, and the input_series is the time series used as input for the test. Here, we are checking to see if the Kubernetes cluster is up within the prod cluster to be in alignment with the original rule. Then, the input series value is set to 0x5 1 1 meaning that the input series value is 0 for the first five minutes and then 1 for the following two minutes. The alert is evaluated at four and five minutes, and the alert will fire at five minutes.

To execute the test, run the following simple command:

```bash
promtool test rules foobar.yml
```

where foobar.yml matches the name of your test file.

If the file returns an invalid result, the relevant error message is printed and the script exits with a FAILED return status. If it’s a valid result, the parsed rules are returned with a SUCCESS return status.

For a complete walkthrough of how promtool works, including syntax and examples, check the official Prometheus documentation on unit testing.

### Third-party rule linters
#### Pint

Cloudflare makes a completely open-source Prometheus rule linter called pint (GitHub). This validator checks Prometheus alerting and recording rules to detect issues prior to execution. It works as part of your continuous integration (CI) pipeline, ad-hoc linting of specific files or directories, and continuous validation of specified files or directories against live servers.

It’s designed to run all queries from each rule, retrieve any results, verify the existence of metrics or labels listed within the rules, and report back all findings. It can still return useful results even when not configured to run against a specific server, however; in this mode, it just won’t return information about whether a specific metric exists.

### Different tests that can be conducted. Examples include:

1. Checking to see how many times a given alerting rule would trigger an alert to ensure a rule isn’t too sensitive
2. Checking to see how many new time series will be created from the new alert rule, to keep track of potential memory usage
Additionally, pint ensures that development teams create alerting rules that are fully in alignment with set company policies. This is greatly helpful in keeping teams all on the same page in their development efforts. For example, you can define that all alerts require a priority label in order to categorize the priority of incoming alert messages and route them accordingly.

### yamllint

A very lightweight but useful tool, yamllint is best suited for pasting in YAML files to verify that all contents of the file are valid code. This tool is actually helpful for checking any and all YAML files, including those used for Kubernetes deployments.
