Kubelet service runs as a systemd service on all the cluster nodes.
You can view the kubelet systemd service under /etc/systemd/system

You can find the exact location using the following find command.

```bash
sudo find / -name "kubelet.service"
```

The /var/lib/kubelet/config.yaml contains all the kubelet-related configurations. The static pod manifest location is added as part of the staticPodPath parameter.
```bash
staticPodPath: /etc/kubernetes/manifests
```

/var/lib/kubelet/kubeadm-flags.env file contains the container runtime environment Linux socket and the infra container (pause container) image.

For example, here is the kubelet config that is using the CRI-O container runtime, as indicated by the Unix socket and the pause container image.

```bash
cat /var/lib/kubelet/kubeadm-flags.env
KUBELET_KUBEADM_ARGS="--container-runtime-endpoint=unix:///var/run/crio/crio.sock --pod-infra-container-image=registry.k8s.io/pause:3.9"
```

## 💡What is a pause container?
A pause container is a minimal container that is the first to be started within a Kubernetes Pod. It is automatically created and managed by Kubernetes within each pod.
The the role of the pause container is to act as a placeholder, holding the network namespace for the pod.

Linux Network Namespace: A Linux kernel feature that provides isolated network stacks
The actual networking for the pods namespace is setup by the CNI.

Can you view the pause container?

While pause containers are important for pod functionality, they are intentionally hidden by default from standard kubectl commands. This is because they are not intended for user interaction and shouldn't be directly managed.

However, you can view the pause container image (registry.k8s.io/pause) from the control plane node using the following command.
```bash
sudo crictl images
```
