We highly recommend running a self-hosted cluster for the entire learning process.

Note: We want you to encounter cluster setup errors and troubleshoot them to gain a good understanding of how the cluster works.
You have the following three options for the course lab setup.

## Option 01: VMs on Local Workstation (Recommended)
If you have a 16 GB laptop, a Vagrant setup is ideal for the cluster setup.
Using Vagrant, you can spin up local Ubuntu VMs.

Vagrant works well on the following operating systems:
1. Windows (Virtualbox + Vagrant)
2. Ubuntu Desktop (Virtualbox + Vagrant)
3. MAC Intel Chip (Virtualbox + Vagrant)
4. MAC Silicon (m1/m2) (VMWare Fusion + Vagrant)

### Note:
For MAC Silicon Desktops, you cant use Virtualbox. You have to use VMware Fusion as the backend. [Follow this blog](https://devopscube.com/build-vms-mac-silicon-with-vagrant/) of detailed setup information.

The Vagrantfile and instruction's for each operating system is part of the following CKA Certification repository.

👉 Github Repository: [CKA Certification Repository](https://devopscube.com/build-vms-mac-silicon-with-vagrant/)
If you have doubts or encounter errors during the setup, you can post them in the community discussions. 

## Option 02: VMs on Cloud
If you don't have the option to set up VMs locally using Vagrant, you can utilize the free cloud credits to run three VMs for the setup.

These credits are sufficient to run a cluster for the duration of the course.

Following are the options.
1. Google Cloud $300 free credits (recomended)
2. AWS $300 free POC credits(You need provide a valid POC use case explanation)
3. Digital Ocean – $200 free credits
4. Vultr Cloud - $250 Free Credits
5. Azure Cloud Hosting - $200 Free Credits

If you are deploying cloud VMs,
Use the following hostnames for the control plane and worker nodes, as we will be using these names throughout the course.
1. controlplane
2. node01
3. node02

## Option 03: Killercoda CKA Playground
Note: With this option you cannot setup a cluster. You can use it for hands on practice.

If you cannot use options 01 and 02, you can utilize the free KillerCoda browser-based CKA playground for hands-on practice.
Each free playground session will be available for one hour.

👉 Killercoda Playground: [CKA playground](https://killercoda.com/techiescamp-playground/scenario/kubernetes-two-node)
With the Plus membership, you can:
1. Access scenarios for up to 4 hours, instead of just one
2. Open up to 3 scenarios simultaneously
3. Tackle CKA scenarios directly in the Exam Remote Desktop
4. Experience faster load times and bypass queues

## Option 04: Minikube or Kind Clusters
Minikube and Kind are easy-to-setup providers for creating clusters on your local workstation.
They make it easy to get started with Kubernetes.

👉 Minkube: [Minikube Installtion Official Guide](https://killercoda.com/techiescamp-playground/scenario/kubernetes-two-node)
👉 Kind: (Quick Start Guide](https://killercoda.com/techiescamp-playground/scenario/kubernetes-two-node)
Although these tools don’t teach you how to set up a cluster from scratch, they allow you to practice all other concepts and get hands-on experience within the cluster environment.
