### kubectl run command
The kubectl run command is used for deploying pods with a single container.

For the exam, we will primarily use kubectl run to generate YAML files using the --dry-run flag.

To view all the supported flags by kubectl run, execute the following command

```bash
kubectl run --help
```

During learning and practicing, try to make use of the help command to identify and use the relevant flags

### Deploying & Managing Pod Using Kubectl
We are going to create an NGINX pod with the following

1.The name of the pod is webserver-pod
2.Use nginx container image. Tag should be 1.14.2
3.It should have restart policy Never.
4.It should have labels app: webserver and environment: production
5.Add an annotation named description and describe the pod.
Let's run a pod using the kubectl command. We have used the backslash (\) for line continuation to organize the command. You don't need to use that in the exam.

```bash
kubectl run webserver-pod \
      --image nginx:1.14.2 \
      --restart=Never \
      --labels=app=webserver,environment=production \
      --annotations description="This pod runs the nginx web server"
```
Here pod name is webserver-pod and the image is nginx. This command will directly deploy the pod in the clusters default namespace.

Let's check the pod. ( If you add -o wide flag, it gives more details of the pod)

```bash
kubectl get po 


NAME            READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
webserver-pod   1/1     Running   0          65s
```

To describe the pod, run the below command: It will display all the details of the pod.

```bash
kubectl describe po webserver-pod
```

If you want to see the pod details in YAML format, run the below command. It will output the whole pod yaml file with all the default fields and their values.

```bash
kubectl get po webserver-pod -o yaml
```

Now, let's delete the pod.

```bash
kubectl delete po webserver-pod
```

## Running an Interactive Pod For Testing
In the CKA exam, there are many scenarios where you need to run test pods to execute commands inside the pod to troubleshoot DNS or an endpoint using curl requests.

In such scenarios, you can run a pod with the --rm flag. It runs an interactive pod and automatically removes it after the command execution. This option ensures that the pod is deleted after the command finishes.

Here is an example of how to start an interactive shell in a pod and remove the pod after exiting the shell.

```bash
kubectl run -i --tty testpod \
     --image=busybox \
     --rm --restart=Never -- sh
```
Here's a breakdown of the command:

1. -i: Keep stdin open even if not attached (interactive mode).
2. --tty: Allocate a TTY (terminal session).
3. --rm: Automatically delete the pod after the command completes.
4. -- sh: The command to run inside the container (in this case, a shell).

After executing the required commands, if you exit, the pod gets deleted automatically.

```bash
kubectl run -i --tty testpod --image=busybox --rm --restart=Never -- sh
```

If you don't see a command prompt, try pressing enter.

ls
bin    dev    etc    home   lib    lib64

exit
pod "testpod" deleted

If you only want to execute a command and don't want an interactive terminal session, you don't need to use the --tty flag.

For example, the following command executes the ls command inside the container, exits, and then the pod gets deleted as well.

```bash
kubectl run -i testpod --image=busybox --rm --restart=Never -- ls

bin
dev
etc
home
lib

pod "testpod" deleted
```
